---
layout: default
title: "What steps should your organization take?"
nav_order: 4
---

# What steps should your organisation take?

In the previous parts, we discussed
the [use-cases](https://www.quantum.amsterdam/part-2-the-applications-of-quantum-computing-how-will-these-machines-change-society/),
the [threats](https://www.quantum.amsterdam/part-8-the-impact-on-cybersecurity/), and
the [timelines](https://www.quantum.amsterdam/part-5-when-can-we-expect-a-useful-quantum-computer-a-closer-look-at-timelines/) of
quantum technologies. We will now take a more strategic perspective:
what concrete steps can we take today? How does one establish a
successful road map? Details will greatly differ per organisation and
per sector, but as we are in an early phase, we expect that most
enterprises will take surprisingly similar approaches during the next
couple of years. 

Several organisations (especially consultants that would love to support
you) have extensive writings on how to get started. Some examples:

- [Capgemini – Quantum technologies: How to prepare your organisation
  for a quantum advantage
  now](https://www.capgemini.com/insights/research-library/quantum-technologies/)

- [McKinsey – Quantum computing use cases are getting real—what you need
  to
  know](https://www.mckinsey.com/capabilities/mckinsey-digital/our-insights/quantum-computing-use-cases-are-getting-real-what-you-need-to-know)

- [BCG – Quantum Computing Is Becoming Business
  Ready ](https://www.bcg.com/publications/2023/enterprise-grade-quantum-computing-almost-ready)

We find most of these somewhat ‘hypey’, with a strong emphasis on the
risks of missing out and the need to take actions quickly. However, they
all mention reasonable strategic steps that organisation can take, which
we will lay out below. Let’s break them up into 3 different stages:

<img src=" {{ site.baseurl }}/media/image30.png" style="width:6.26806in"
alt="what steps can businesses companies take in quantum professionals guide 1" />

**1. Start with no-regret moves**

Most companies start with early steps aimed at better understanding the
situation. These can be done with very little financial risk.

Some must-do actions:

- Appoint a quantum lead, or a quantum working group

- [Read up and
  learn.](https://www.quantum.amsterdam/further-reading-list-of-information-resources-about-quantum-computing/) If
  you’ve come this far in this Guide, you’re already doing a fantastic
  job. 

- Create internal awareness

Optionally:

- Put quantum on the agenda with senior management. 

- Involve collaborators, suppliers and vendors, make your interest in
  quantum known. It is in your benefit if suppliers are well-prepared. 

- Participate in a workshop, hackathon, and other events.

We have a list of interesting [learning
resources](https://www.quantum.amsterdam/further-reading-list-of-information-resources-about-quantum-computing/),
and an overview of Netherlands-based[ education
opportunities](https://www.quantum.amsterdam/education/workshops-and-training/) and [events](https://quantumdelta.nl/events). 

Very soon, the quantum journey will split into two fairly different
categories:

 

1.  Preparing for **quantum applications, **where the goal is to
    leverage quantum technologies to gain some competitive advantage
    (for example, by strengthening your R&D, further optimising your
    logistics, improving a product, etc). For most companies, the main
    items of interest are the [applications of quantum
    computing](https://www.quantum.amsterdam/part-2-the-applications-of-quantum-computing-how-will-these-machines-change-society/). 

2.  Migrating to **quantum-safe cryptography,** where the goal is to
    keep your IT secure against attackers with a quantum computer.

It is important to make this distinction, because these categories have
different goals and are conventionally addressed by different
departments. Let us first look at quantum applications.

Prepare to use quantum applications

**2a: Start exploring use-cases**

For most businesses, the goal of early, low-regret moves is to be ready
to leverage quantum technologies fairly soon after they start offering
an advantage. 

Must do:

- Find the most impactful use-cases in your area.

- Sketch a road map for the coming years. 

Optional but recommended: 

- Start concrete explorations, for example by testing and implementing
  trial use-cases. It is relatively easy (and fun!) to follow the
  tutorial of programming packages like Qiskit or Cirq. 

- Find a partner. Save costs by collaborating on early, pre-competitive
  exploration. 

- Create PR! We notice that many companies are very actively promoting
  their early results on quantum applications, even if these do not
  offer significant advantages yet. 

- Build a skilled workforce. *[BCG
  states](https://www.bcg.com/publications/2023/enterprise-grade-quantum-computing-almost-ready):
  “The biggest challenge may be talent, given the supply constraints.
  \[…\] Building in-house talent will take time, so it is best to start
  as soon as possible.*

**A good exercise is to look at your current needs in high-performance
computing. **What do you currently spend your computing budgets on? Are
there any areas where new tools in computation or modelling could
provide serious business value (for example, by being faster, tackling
bigger problems, or delivering higher accuracy)? Which quantities would
you ideally have calculated, but are beyond the reach of current
computers? 

Sometimes you rapidly identify use-cases that are not worth further
addressing. For example, if today’s computational power is easily
sufficient to meet your needs, it’s unlikely that you want to invest in
quantum computing for that use case. 

 

**R&D partnerships  
**At Quantum.Amsterdam, we have strong ties to Amsterdam-based research
organisations. Offers you might be interested in include:

- Short-term applied research by the [Quantum Application
  Lab](https://quantumapplicationlab.com/), which could lead to a
  roadmap or a proof-of-concept implementation. 

- We invite collaborators to sponsor a PhD or Postdoc researcher at an
  academic institute, leading to a 2-4 year intensive investigation of a
  certain use case. There are
  often [subsidies](https://english.rvo.nl/subsidies-programmes/ppp) for
  such public-private partnerships. Our website shows several[ examples
  of the past
  collaborations](https://www.quantum.amsterdam/q-a-collaborations/q-a-projects/),
  and information about starting a new project can be found at the
  local [tech transfer
  office](https://www.ixa.nl/for-companies/partner-up-with-research/). 

Also see:

- Quantum.Amsterdam meetup   (Youtube)

**3a: Implementing actual applications, whenever ready**

From here onwards, we find it hard to give concrete advice: goals may
depend on your area of business, and on the way that the field of
quantum will progress. Other sources will simply tell you do “develop a
long-term strategy” or similar. 

For inspiration, or a dot on the horizon, you may think towards a
competence center for quantum computing, similar to how many companies
have special departments for data science and/or AI. It may also be
reasonable to combine these departments. 

A common advice that we will relay here: the business use of quantum
computers is still very uncertain, so at best we can recommend to remain
agile!

Migrating to post-quantum cryptography

**2b. Prepare for migration to post-quantum cryptography. **

Cryptography is a completely different beast, with a more concrete goal,
and more urgent timelines for most organisations ([here’s
why](https://www.quantum.amsterdam/part-2-the-applications-of-quantum-computing-how-will-these-machines-change-society/)).
Luckily, pretty much everyone faces the same problem, making it easier
to give concrete guidelines. In essence, anyone who uses modern
cryptography should migrate to Post-Quantum Cryptography (PQC) in the
next decade. Although standards and regulations are still under
construction, there are some urgent steps should be taken well before
the migration can start. 

We recommend the [PQC Migration
Handbook](https://english.aivd.nl/publications/publications/2023/04/04/the-pqc-migration-handbook) (April
2023), written by the Dutch secret service AIVD, and research
organisations CWI and TNO. 

In general, as a first step, it recommends to:

- Determine the risk and urgency of PQC migration. This likely requires
  making an inventory of all cryptography in use, and determining how
  long your data should remain private. 

- Create a migration plan. 

{{ begin quote }}

“Certain organisations should already start working on mitigating
measures now. \[..\] For instance, organisations handling data that will
still be confidential 20 years from now, or organisations developing
long-lived systems that will still be in use decades from now.”

**THE PQC MIGRATION HANDBOOK**

<img src=" {{ site.baseurl }}/media/image31.png" style="width:2.38542in"
alt="Screenshot 2023 05 09 at 17.54.18" />

Judging from previous migrations, \[implementing PQC\] might take well
over five years.

**THE PQC MIGRATION HANDBOOK**

{{ end quote }}

**3b. Migrate**

This is a much more technical part, for which you will need a well
prepared migration plan. We find it likely that quantum computers might
break today’s RSA encryption standard [somewhere in the
2030’s](https://www.quantum.amsterdam/part-5-when-can-we-expect-a-useful-quantum-computer-a-closer-look-at-timelines/),
so we stress that such migration should be completed well before that
time — taking in to account that IT migrations can take significantly
longer than originally planned!

## FAQ

**Should I have knowledge of quantum mechanics? Should I understand
quantum hardware? **

When you are tasked with implementing early-stage quantum applications:
then yes!

As a strategic manager, or when working on post-quantum cryptography:
no. 

**Do I really need to work on NISQ?**

That’s a good question that is hard to answer. We find it unlikely that
near-term quantum computers (in the next, say, 1-4 years) will create
relevant advantages, although there are plenty of experts who are more
optimistic. Future applications will likely differ strongly from the way
we ‘program’ quantum computers today, but practising on today’s hardware
can grow your understanding and give an edge in experience. 

**What should I do first: focus on quantum applications or post-quantum
cryptography?**

For most organisations, the threat to security is more urgent,
especially because the migration trajectory can take several years (and
this must be completed well before we have large-scale quantum
computers!). 

However, most organisations work on both trajectories in parallel.

**I’m looking for a collaboration – what should I do?**

Typically, business developers meet each other at [conferences and
events](https://www.quantum.amsterdam/further-reading-list-of-information-resources-about-quantum-computing/),
where you may find like-minded partners. We also encourage you
to [contact us](https://www.quantum.amsterdam/contact/) for some
sparring on what your organisation can do, and to get connected to
Netherlands-based knowledge institutes like QuSoft and [Quantum
Application Lab](http://www.quantumapplicationlab.com/). 

