---
layout: default
title: 1 Preface, Why this book?
nav_order: 1
---

## Preface: Why this book?

![Silhouette of people standing in a room with a glass of wine
Description automatically
generated](/media/image1.png){width="8.307086614173228in"
height="2.6102362204724407in"}

"Quantum computing will change everything," the man in front of me said.
Standing tall and confident, he took another sip of his drink before
continuing, "It will be the biggest revolution since the invention of
the transistor. Imagine a world where we can cure any disease with
personalised medicine. A world where new energy sources will free us
from our dependence on fossil fuels. Not to mention that..."

\"Well---\" I tried to interrupt, but the man passionately rattled on.

\"It will finally enable us to build general Artificial Intelligence
that can take over our tedious everyday jobs, so 95% of our population
no longer has to work!\"

"You know that quantum computers are still quite some years away,
right?", I countered. He leaned in, eyes gleaming with excitement.
"That\'s what most people think. But the reality is, we\'re closer than
ever. Quantum supremacy has already been achieved. Google did it in
2019. Since then, progress has been exponential. Did you see the
presentation by that guy from QuantaLeap? He could instantly simulate
ninety thousand investment portfolios thanks to this quantum annealing
algorithm.\"

\-\--

The above conversation captures a feeling that many seasoned experts in
quantum computing will have. And perhaps this scene is not even
exaggerated. Plentiful reputable sources report that 'quantum' is key in
[tackling climate
change](https://www.mckinsey.com/capabilities/mckinsey-digital/our-insights/quantum-computing-just-might-save-the-planet),
[revolutionising
AI](https://www.forbes.com/sites/forbestechcouncil/2024/05/02/six-ground-breaking-industries-quantum-computing-is-projected-to-revolutionize/),
and building [unhackable
networks](https://www.newscientist.com/article/2368353-an-unhackable-quantum-internet-is-being-built-in-new-york-city/).

Experts who are actually *building* these quantum computers are much,
much more reluctant. At an academic conference, you hear a completely
different story. Scientists
[ridicule](https://twitter.com/DulwichQuantum) the absurd claims that
come from consultants and some aggressive startups. They will point out
that the applications of quantum computers are still very much
uncertain, and that we're still searching for convincing uses of these
computers.

The quantum scene seems to have two completely separate worlds. A
business world, that reaches out to anybody who will hear them about the
revolutionary capabilities of quantum computers. And the academic world,
the community of quiet experts that slowly but steadily bring this
quantum computer to reality, sharing their results in highly technical
papers that require a Master's degree to understand.

I was grasped by this paradoxical situation. What can we really expect
from quantum technology? What are quantum computers good at, and how
does this compare to other alternatives? When will we have a large-scale
quantum computer, and what will it look like? Having the luxury of
working at the interface between a large research group and a community
of commercial entities, I have the ideal boundary conditions to
understand the story from both sides and to translate the academic
knowledge into the perspective of a company, an IT department, or a
government.

I started writing these texts for two reasons. First, I aim to offer an
alternative to the hyped and unbalanced articles that would otherwise
populate the top entries in Google search results (or even the New York
Times [best-selling
books](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Quantum_Supremacy)). Second, I see
the need for a reliable source of information that others can reference
when disagreeing about facts or debunking myths. I am already very
grateful for the many colleagues who frequently refer to an early
version of this book!

That doesn't mean that this book contains only confirmed facts -- not at
all! Writing about a computer of the future comes with uncertainty. In
2005, nobody could have predicted that just a few years later, everyone
would be playing games and consuming the internet on their smartphones.
In 2015, nobody could have predicted the impact of Large Language Models
like ChatGPT. And indeed, today, our best predictions of a future
quantum revolution won't be quite so accurate either.

Even worse, experts wildly disagree in several cases. For example, the
usefulness of quantum AI and optimization is continuously disputed, and
the rate at which hardware will progress depends on some yet-to-discover
breakthroughs. The best I could do is describe various perspectives on
these matters and highlight the best arguments from either side.

Without plentiful discussions and disagreements, I wouldn't have been
able to gather the facts and opinions in this book. And it shouldn't
stop there. I keep welcoming criticism, opinions, and feedback about
these complex topics, hoping to refine these texts even more in future
updates.

\-\--

Even though much is still uncertain, I think that a reliable picture of
the prospects of quantum computing is more important than ever. Quantum
startups are acquiring huge investments, allowing them to hire managers,
software developers, salesmen, and marketers. Governments need informed
policymakers, and journalists should cover quantum breakthroughs. Pretty
much every organisation that deals with IT will want to keep a close eye
on the impact that 'quantum' will have on them.

This book is for precisely these people who don't need to understand all
the technical details but still need to talk, read, and write about
quantum technologies. This is why I will focus on an accessible language
that everyone can understand. We don't care so much about the underlying
math or physics, but rather about the *functionality* of a quantum
computer: the opportunities, the threats, and the concrete actions
organisations can take.

