---
layout: default
title: "Preface: why this book?"
nav_order: 1
---
 
 
# Preface: why this book?

&nbsp;

<img src=" {{ site.baseurl }}/media/image1.png"
style="width:6.26737in" />

&nbsp;

*“Quantum computing will change everything,” the man in front of me
said. Standing tall and confident, he took another sip of his drink
before continuing, “It will be the biggest revolution since the
invention of the transistor. Imagine a world where we can cure any
disease with personalised medicine. A world where new energy sources
will free us from our dependence on fossil fuels. Not to mention that…”*

*"Well—" I tried to interrupt, but the man passionately rattled on.*

*"It will finally enable us to build general Artificial Intelligence
that can take over our tedious everyday jobs, so 95% of our population
no longer has to work!"*

*“You know that quantum computers are still quite some years away,
right?”, I countered. He leaned in, eyes still gleaming with
excitement.*

*“That's what most people think. But the reality is, we're closer than
ever. Quantum supremacy has already been achieved. Google did it in
2019; since then, progress has been exponential. Did you see the
presentation by that guy from Goldman Sachs? Their investments already
see higher returns than ever since their new Monte Carlo algorithm."*

----

The above conversation captures a feeling that many seasoned experts in
quantum computing will have. And this is by no means exaggerated.
Plentiful reputable sources report that ‘quantum’ is key in [tackling
climate
change](https://www.mckinsey.com/capabilities/mckinsey-digital/our-insights/quantum-computing-just-might-save-the-planet),
[revolutionising
AI](https://www.forbes.com/sites/forbestechcouncil/2024/05/02/six-ground-breaking-industries-quantum-computing-is-projected-to-revolutionize/),
and building [unhackable
networks](https://www.newscientist.com/article/2368353-an-unhackable-quantum-internet-is-being-built-in-new-york-city/).

Experts who are actually *building* these quantum computers are much,
much more reluctant. At an academic conference, you hear a completely
different story. Scientists
[ridicule](https://twitter.com/DulwichQuantum) the absurd claims that
some consultants and startups make. They will point out that the
applications of quantum computers are still very much uncertain, and
that we’re still searching for convincing uses cases.

The quantum scene seems to have two completely separate worlds. A
business world, that reaches out to anybody who will hear them about the
unprecedented capabilities of quantum computers. And the academic world,
the community of experts that quietly bring this quantum computer to
reality, sharing their results in technical papers that require a PhD to
understand.

I was grasped by this paradoxical situation. Who is right? How powerful
are these quantum computers really, and how do they compare to existing
technologies? In what year will we have a large-scale quantum computer,
and what will it look like? These are billion-dollar questions, but the
answers will wildly vary, depending on who you ask.

After searching for these answers for a decade, I’ve finally found quite
a unique position to answer most of these questions for myself. I have
the luxury of being a native in both the academic and the commercial
world. I’ve seen all the arguments from both sides and can cut through
dishonest and deceptive claims. I have the privilege of being surrounded
by the world’s most renowned experts from both worlds, and I have heard
their u lted opinions and predictions that they may not readily throw
out publicly. And most of all, after training many new colleagues and
setting up professional learning programs, I developed a good intuition
about what newcomers *want* to know about quantum technology, and how to
explain it in an accessible way.

However, the definitive motivation to write this book came primarily
from two external factors. First, like many others in this field, I feel
uncomfortable with the many hyped and unbalanced articles that would
otherwise populate the top entries in Google search results (or even the
New York Times [best-selling
books](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Quantum_Supremacy)[^1]). Second, I
see the need for an authoritative source of information that others can
reference when disagreeing about facts or debunking myths. I am already
very grateful for the many colleagues who frequently refer to an early
version of this book.

That doesn’t mean that this book contains only confirmed facts – not at
all! Writing about a computer of the future comes with mountains of
uncertainty. In 2005, nobody could have predicted that a mere 5 years
ahead, everyone would be playing games and consuming the internet on
their smartphones. In 2015, nobody could have predicted the impact of
Large Language Models like ChatGPT. And indeed, today’s best predictions
of a future quantum revolution won’t be quite so accurate either.

Even worse, experts wildly disagree in several cases. For example, the
usefulness of quantum AI and optimisation is vigorously disputed, and
the rate at which hardware will progress depends on many yet-to-discover
breakthroughs. The best I could do is describe various perspectives on
these matters and highlight the best arguments from either side.

Without plentiful discussions and disagreements, I wouldn’t have been
able to gather the facts and opinions in this book. And it shouldn’t
stop there. I keep welcoming criticism, opinions, and feedback about
these complex topics, aiming to refine these texts even more in future
updates.

Even though much is still uncertain, I think that a reliable indication
of the prospects of quantum computing is more important than ever.
Quantum startups are acquiring huge investments, allowing them to hire
managers, software developers, salesmen, and marketers. Governments need
informed policymakers, and journalists should cover quantum
breakthroughs. Pretty much every organisation that deals with IT will
want to keep a close eye on the impact that ‘quantum’ will have on them.

This book is for precisely these people who don’t need to understand all
the technical details but still need to talk, read, and write about
quantum technologies. This is why I will focus on an accessible language
everyone can understand. We don’t care so much about the underlying math
or physics, but rather about the *functionality* of a quantum computer:
the opportunities, the threats, and the concrete actions organisations
can take.

How should you read this book? I chose to split the content into three
parts. The first part contains the essentials that we recommend everyone
read. This is an incredibly efficient way to learn all the background
that you need – you should be ready to understand other sources and have
some depth in professional discussions or meetings. To get into more
detail, parts two and three contain more information about the
(software) applications and about the (hardware) devices, respectively.
A final fourth part is reserved for additional resources that can be
useful or fun when continuing your quantum journey.

[^1]: I’m refering to Michio Kaku’s book “Quantum Supremacy”, but before
    you even consider reading it, you might like to see the book review
    by a professor in quantum computer science
    (<https://scottaaronson.blog/?p=7321>).

